the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
so where are we in our grand list of our
five types of problems we've done weak
acid and water weak base in water salt
and buffer we only have two left and
that's what we're going to talk about
right now strong acids and strong bases
and we're going to talk about them in in
terms of acid-base titrations so
switching to today's handout so
titrations how many of you have done a
titration in a laboratory and like okay
a lot a lot of people okay if you
haven't I have to say you're not missing
anything it is really it's like watching
paint dry for most of the time during
the titration okay so here in an
acid-base titration you have the
addition of say a base of known
concentration to an acid of unknown
concentration and you can use this by
figuring out what volume you need to
reach the equivalence point you can
figure out the concentration of that
acid or base if you know the
concentration of two things you can
often use it to figure out a KA or
calculate a molecular weight but that's
the the purpose of the titration so
let's look at the shape of these
titration curves so here we have a
strong acid with a strong base so we
start out all we have at point zero is
the strong acid so we should have a very
low pH here and then it should change
slowly then it changes very rapidly and
then changes slowly again so what is
this point s so that point s has many
many names which are all equivalent it's
called the equivalence point and we had
the clicker question in the beginning it
was a was mentioning that the S here
really stands for the stoichiometric
point both of these are the same thing
and it's the theoretical volume in which
that base that you've added the number
of moles of that base is equal to the
number of moles of acid you had so it's
the the point at which the moles are
equal to each other and so that's
stoichiometric one-to-one or equivalence
the
our equivalent so all these names are
the same they all mean the same thing
don't get tricked if problems say one
thing or the other
you also might hear end point that's
often the result of the experiment that
you do where you figure out what volume
you needed to add to have a color change
so the way these work usually is you
have this and you go drip drip drip and
you look for a color change and at that
point of the color change the first
little hint of the color change is where
you want to stop and measure the volume
but often you get very frustrated and
you go from totally clear to you very
very slow and you're right in here and
then you can't stand it anymore you jump
right up here and you have to do it over
and over again but it should be that the
end point should equal the equivalence
point so if you're good at these kinds
of problems you might be able to do a
quick and dirty estimate what the value
is and then figure out exactly how much
you can add before you have to go slow
ie you can cheat which I highly
recommend and doing these kinds of
laboratory exercises so knowing how to
do the math is really valuable of these
problems okay so we had a strong acid
and a strong base here's the same curve
for a strong base with a strong acid
where we're adding the strong acid into
the strong base again now we're gonna
start in the beginning at point zero
before we've added any acid we have a
basic pH goes slow goes fast through
point s the equivalence point or
stoichiometric point and then go slow
again so how do you know and the TAS are
going to come down and do a little demo
for you now about pH indicators how do
you know and for those of you who have
done these done these experiments in lab
again you have this color change and
usually you're clear you go a little bit
more you have a little bit more and you
go to this but as I was saying what
happens most the time is you go from
this clear all the way to the really
dark and you have to start all over
again because you missed the endpoint
so these pH indicators are able to tell
you that there's this change in pH so
the TAS are going to show
you using a pH and come on and set up
I'm just talking while you set up over
there you can use the document camera if
you need it so so our demo TAS have used
created a natural dye from red cabbage
and this dye when it's in acid has a
different slightly different structure
than in base which causes it to have
these two different colors so we can
tell which things are acidic and which
things are basic by the color of the
indicator and I'm just going to hand
over a mic if it's on yes okay so we've
got our solutions here this is lemon
juice we've got dye put water in here
right yeah water vinegar I think maybe
it was vinegar than this is vinegar all
right
don't do that don't do that laughs label
your container yes yes indeed okay so
we've got lemon juice water vinegar and
ammonia
did you add some water into that can you
okay so we're gonna add a little bit of
the pee the indicator the indicator came
from red cabbage so the dye and the red
cabbage it is a molecule that can be
protonated and when the molecule gets
protonated it it basically it's double
bonds start moving around and when you
do that it absorbs light differently so
what we're gonna see when we pour into
there is that you'll see this which is
the the acid forms a nice pinkish color
this was the water and when you poured
into the water nothing really happens
and you can kind of understand that
because the indicator itself is a
water-based solution so it's gonna be
purple
this was the vinegar and as we did last
time the vinegar is acidic and this was
the ammonia and I'm gonna add a little
bit of water can you add a little water
into this one you add it okay great
and then we're gonna kind of
do a little excursion here so what this
is
this is a piece of oh it's called a
piece of dry ice which is your solid co2
and what I'm gonna do is I'm going to
drop it into there so this is kind of a
bit of a yeah put it over here so this
is an interesting demo because oh that's
not useful at all can we change that oh
okay well well what I was talking about
was basically when you drop the co2 into
this mixture what's happening is that
the co2 actually decomposes and it forms
something called carbonic acid and good
idea carbonic acid is is is an acid so
it will actually change the pH of the
solution as we're talking and what this
is relevant for is really for global
warming so we know about companies when
they make it's true when you have
companies and they make lots of
different kinds of chemical compounds
they'll release co2 into the atmosphere
and when the co2 gets released is it
working or no
upside down that's even cooler so when
the co2 gets released into the
atmosphere is basically by lechatelier's
principle you add all this co2 it will
force the reaction to start making
carbonic acid and that will react with
the water vapor and start making the
water in the air very acidic wow that's
that's not useful at all and the color
is not really changing but it was
supposed to I think we might add too
much space well we can keep it yeah we
can keep an eye on watch the color
change while it's upside down
but anyway yeah that's how the indicator
works and yeah that's that I guess okay
so we can leave this here I'll switch
the document camera back and yeah I
might add a little more I still it's
very very concentrated still see if we
can get a little bit more without too
much overflow I think it's changing a
little bit actually yeah
all right well we'll keep an eye on it
okay so let's go through and do
calculate some points on a strong acid
and base curve so we can check off those
two final final types of pH problems so
here when were calculating strong acid
and strong bases if say we have a strong
base that's 2.5 molar NaOH being
titrated with a strong acid HCl at point
three four molar so first we want to
calculate the pH before the equivalence
point when we've just added say five
mils of our strong acid at to the
solution which was 25 mils of our strong
base so the first thing we're going to
do is calculate how many moles of base
that is so how many did we have in here
and since this base is strong the number
of moles of sodium hydroxide added
equals the amount of hydroxide forms
that's pretty you know that's the
definition of a strong base and it is
hydroxide so pretty much that's how much
you get so all we have to do is know how
to calculate the number of moles and
that is the volume that we had and we're
converting that to liters times our
concentration and so that gives 6.25
times 10 to the minus 3 moles all right
so we know how many moles of Oh H we
have now we need to figure out how many
moles of acid we added when we added
five milliliters of the acid so it's a
strong acid so the moles of acid added
equal the number of moles of our
hydronium ions that are formed
definition of strong acid and so we had
five milliliters we convert to liters
times our concentration that gives us
one point seven times ten to the minus
three moles so now we need to figure out
how what the new amount of hydroxide is
so we had we're gonna convert some of
our hydroxide will react
with the amount of acid added because
the stoichiometry is one-to-one
you're going to react equal numbers of
Oh H with h3o plus
so we had six point two five times ten
to the minus three moles
we've added this number of moles of acid
so that many moles are going to are
going to be can going to be formed into
salt and we're left with this minus this
or four point five five times ten to the
minus three moles of O h minus left so
at this point this is a strong base and
water problem all we have is hydroxide
ions left in our solution we've we've
converted all the acid that we added
into a salt because it reacted with the
base and so this is strong base now so
for strong base all we have to do is
calculate the molarity and then
calculate Poh and pH so for molarity we
have the number of moles left four point
five five times ten to the minus three
in our new volume and this is the part
where people forget we had 25 mils we
added five more so our new volume is 30
mils and so we have a new concentration
and then from that we calculate pH first
we do Poh plugging in our hydroxide ion
concentration and then calculate pH
using the fact that at room temperature
and all these problems our root
temperature that would be 14 minus the
Poh is the pH and we have a point
somewhere around here point B on our
titration curve after we've add five
mils of strong acid our pH is still
pretty basic thirteen point one eight
left so strong base and water problem
all you have to do is calculate the
concentration of O h minus then the Poh
and then the pH so you don't have to
have any of these minus and pluses in
terms of setting up our tables and using
ka s and K B's for a weak base in water
problem it's a concentration of
hydroxide ion Poh P
all right so let's move on now and think
about what how what volume we would need
to get to the stoichiometric point so
you're often asked to calculate the
volume of the strong acid needed to get
to the stoichiometric or the equivalence
point and to do this you need to think
about how many moles of O H you have
because at the equivalence point you
have equal numbers of moles of acid so
we had six point two five times ten to
the minus three moles of O H originally
and at the equivalence point then how
many moles of acid do we need to add we
have to add that exact same number by
definition it's the equivalence point
it's the stoichiometric point so if you
know how many moles of the base you had
that's going to be equal to the moles of
acid you need to add so now we want to
figure out the volume that that's needed
we know the number of moles that we need
and we know the concentration so now we
just have to calculate the volume so we
have the moles we use the concentration
of the acid to figure out the volume
that has to be added all right and what
would be the pH at this point it would
be seven so this is a really fast
question to ask on an exam because all
you have to do is say if it was a week
if it was a strong base and a strong
acid they're gonna form a neutral salt
and water so the pH is seven and that's
it no calculations needed you can answer
that question very quickly
so strong acid strong base at the
equivalence point equal number of moles
you're going to get a salt that's
neutral in the salt here we have HCl and
NaOH is just NaCl salt so remember at
the equivalence point strong acid strong
base the pH is going to be seven all
right so now let's go down here and try
point D so just beyond the equivalence
point so here we want to calculate the
pH
after 1 mil of strong acid has been
added after you have reached the
equivalence point
so you went 1 mil too far in your
titration and this is a strong acid and
water problem so our last type of
problem here so first what you want to
do is figure out how many moles of this
acid were added due to this 1 mil extra
and again it's a strong acid so the
amount of acid added is going to be
equal to the hydronium ion
concentrations form definition of strong
acid so we had a concentration of 0.34
of our strong acid we added 1 mil extra
so we have three point four times ten to
the minus four moles of h3o plus now we
need to calculate the molarity of that
and that's a clicker question
okay so the trick here is just to think
about what is the volume at this point
and if we look over here okay do you
wanna just we're gonna we're trying a
couple of different variations of the
the experiment over here but just see if
we can we can get it over time but let's
let's uh we will come back to that at
the end we'll just leave it there and
say okay or did you want to say
something all right why don't you talk
about it briefly and then we'll look at
the mean we did the experiment again
kind of with a less concentrated
solution added several pieces of dry ice
and as you can see the color yeah we can
put it on the camera can't it's fine but
the color is changing very slowly which
is a lot slower than we expected it to
change but um you dilute the
concentration and this is turning blue
and it will eventually turn kind of
yellowish pink which is when it will
officially become an acid so just leave
that there alright so the trick here was
to figure out the volume so you had 25
mils to begin with you needed eighteen
point four to get to the stoichiometric
or the equivalence point and then you
had to add then you added one more past
the equivalence point and if you
remember to add those three volumes
together then you will get the right
concentration and when you get the right
concentration the rest of the problem is
very easy and I'll just mention also
significant figures here we have three
here cuz we had three there and so then
you just take the pH of this this is the
hydronium ion concentration and that
will give your answer and it'll be peach
two point one one six with all of those
significant figures which you can never
measure that accurately but nonetheless
that's what the rules would tell us so a
strong acid in water problem is just you
just calculate the hydronium ion
concentration and then pH so this is a
pretty simple part all right so if we go
back now
to our to our diagram we've measured a
couple parts we measured point B and and
so we had a pH of thirteen point one
eight this was like a strong base in
water problem we measure at Point s we
calculated that we needed eighteen point
four mils of strong acid and our pH is
seven and so at two the trick to doing
this problem was just to remember that
the moles of strong acid equal the moles
of strong base at this point and then
for point D one mil past the equivalence
point the pH was two point one one six
and this is like a strong acid and water
problem and notice how dramatic it is
appear at pH seven you add one mil too
much too much and you're ready at pH two
so this is a very rapid change this is
why a lot of these titration experiments
are so frustrating that you add a little
bit too much and you're just way way way
beyond the stoichiometric point alright
so in one titration curve here we had
three types of problems but as we get
into weak acid and weak base which will
do now you'll see that a titration curve
is actually all five types of problems
so this is why one wants to start
problem set seven early okay so we've
done all of these now and now we can
apply all of these types of problems
while doing weak acid strong base part
and we'll just start this and we'll
continue it later but let's go through
the curves now so this is in your
handout this is the curve for the weak
acid and strong base and I just want to
remind you what we just talked about
which is strong acid and strong base so
for weak acid and strong base the curves
look quite a bit different so here we
start at a higher pH because it's a weak
weak acid here is lower it's a strong
acid then we go up the pH levels off and
this is called the buffering region
there's no such buffering region with a
strong acid strong base because strong
and so on bases don't form good buffers
but weak acids and strong bases can
generate good buffering region because a
strong base can convert some of the weak
acid to its conjugate weak base and that
creates a buffer in this region then the
pH starts to change again it's constant
in the buffering region starts to change
again you get to the equivalence point
the definition of equivalence points are
the same equal number of moles of acids
and base at the equivalence point but
now the equivalence point is not at pH 7
anymore it's greater than pH 7 because
we've converted our weak acid to its
conjugate base so up here we have
conjugate base which makes it more basic
and so the pH is greater than 7 and then
the curve goes up again we also have
something that's special for a weak weak
with strong titration that doesn't exist
with strong strong and that's called the
half equivalence point the half
equivalence point is the point where
half the volume and half the number of
moles needed to reach the equivalence
point have been added so that's the half
equivalence point it's half of the
equivalence point all right so let's
just look at these a couple of different
points here and look at at this this
figure here and we'll end with this so
and and I'm just gonna have my TAS come
down and just help me with this this
last part so let's see if we can get two
more we already have someone with a hat
you have a hat we have two more TAS all
right so these are all weak acids over
here so we have just our weak acids and
we have four of them and so the TAS can
come other Tia's you want to come down
can help out this is volume equals zero
so this is like a weak acid and water
problem so now let's bring our moles of
strong base over here so now Amanda
you're a strong base so your
so you're going to react just with one
with one of these Connie's weak acids
and deprotonate in and form of a
conjugate base there we go and then you
can you can go off and form your salt
and water all right so now we have a
buffer situation and we have a buffer
situation when we have some conjugate
acid and some conjugate base we have a
special type of category of buffer at
the half equivalence point where you
have half the conjugate acid half the
conjugate so another mole of strong base
comes in and deprotonates one of our
acid so why don't you be yeah and you go
off in form form a salt and so then we
have half the weak acid and half the
conjugate base now as we go on we're
going to reach the equivalence point and
now we've added the amount of strong
base that will fully deprotonate our
weak acid so why don't we have two more
strong bases come along and deprotonate
and so now we have only weak bases left
there just weak bases left because we
added equal numbers of moles of our
strong base as we had weak acid so now
we have conjugate base so this is like a
weak base in water problem and then at
the end if we add more strong base and
the strong base comes over there's
nothing to do is just strong base in
solution and so this is a strong base in
water problem so the point is one
titration problem is really five
different types of acid-base problems so
start problem set seven early see you on
Wednesday
hey all right let's just take 10 more
seconds
okay
I don't know feeling that more people
understand how to do this but it's just
a matter of thinking about the sort of
the sign of things so the the trick here
you have a pH of 4 pKa of 4.19
and so obviously it's the difference but
you have to think about if you're if you
want the ratio to be a minus 2 a which
expression you're going to use here to
give you the the correct the correct one
so just pay attention to your sign oh we
show a lot all your work on an exam so
today we're gonna finish the lecture
notes from last time on titrations
continue with titrations and toward the
end of the class we're going to start
the next unit which is oxidation
reduction so we want to take out a
lecture no 23 top of page 4 where we
have this curve so as we're finishing
last time we saw the curve for a
titration of a weak acid with a strong
base and this is the curve for a weak
base that's being titrated with a strong
acid and drawing curves on an exam
that's one of my favorite exam questions
so make sure you know how to draw these
types of titrations so things that you
should pay attention to in drawing them
if it is a weak base that's being
titrated with a strong acid you would
expect that before you've added any acid
that you're going to have a basic ph so
at point zero here you would expect a
basic ph so then the pH starts
decreasing as you're titrating in the
strong acid and you go into this region
of constant pH where that's the
buffering region so the pH is changing
very little it plateaus it's flat so
when you're drawing a region like this
make sure that in the curve it looks
kind of flat because the idea of a
buffering region is that the pH isn't
changing much here you have the
conjugate acid and the conjugate
conjugate base
so it's a buffer like problem then when
you get out of that buffering region the
pH drops rapidly which is often one of
the fun's and doing these titrations in
lab nothing's changing nothing's
changing nothing changing and all of a
sudden you're down here so at the
equivalence point here the equivalence
point is going to be below pH seven
because at this point you have added in
the same number of moles of acid as the
weak base so you've converted all of the
weak base to its conjugate acid so the
pH is below seven and then it drops off
rapidly so again in these titration
problems they're really five different
types of problems within them when you
have the volume of zero it's a weak base
in water problem in this buffering
region here it's a buffer problem and
there's a special kind of buffer problem
at the half equivalence point where the
number of moles of the conjugate acid
formed equal the number of moles of base
and then we get to the equivalence point
and now we've converted all the weak
base to its conjugate acid so this is
just a weak acid and water problem and
then down here it's a strong acid in
water problem so again the trick in
doing these is to recognize where you
are in the curve and figure out what
type of problem it is once you figure
out what type of problem it is it's
usually not so bad to solve it because
you can all figure out how to solve
these five types of problems it's
recognizing what type of problem it is
at various time during the titration and
in some of the problems that problems
you'll have all of the various points to
do but on an exam you're going to just
be thrown into the middle of a titration
and have to think about where it is in
the midst of the titration what type of
problem is it all right so now we're
going to go through and do an example
work kind of point by point for a
titration and the titration we're going
to do is a weak acid and a strong base
so that's the curve here so we start at
low pH and then go up so the particular
problem we're going to work and we're
going to work all these points and then
we're going to have a bonus point e at
the end is formic acid and we have 25
mils of 0.1 molar
formic acid and we're try trading with a
strong base sodium hydroxide 0.15 molar
and you're often going to be given the
KA of the acid so the first point point
a is volume zero you haven't added any
of your strong base yet so you can write
the expression for what's going on there
you have your acid plus water going to
hydronium ion concentration and you're
forming the conjugate base of that weak
acid so this is again a weak acid
problem so you know how to do weak acid
problems so titrations are just the
collection of problems we've already
talked about how to do so just very
briefly we'll go through this pretty
fast at this point so we have our weak
acid in water we had point 1 molar and
we had none of the other to begin with
so we're at zero volume here so as the
equilibrium is reached we have point one
zero minus X X and X so because this is
weak acid in water problem we can use ka
to solve the problem which is our acid
ionization constant it's one point seven
seven times 10 to the minus 4 for this
particular one we can set this up its
products over reactants at equilibrium
so x squared over point one zero minus X
again water doesn't fit in that's our
solvent so it's not in our expression we
can solve this with the quadratic or we
can assume that X is small which again
is a pretty good assumption usually for
a weak acid problem and by assuming X is
small that means this minus X drops out
so we're saying X is small compared to
the concentration that we started with
and then we can solve for X if we do
that here we get point zero zero four to
one and that we can check and we find
that it is four point two percent of 0.1
so that's under five percent so that
assumption is okay again
using the 5% rule and then we can solve
this X is our hydronium ion
concentration so we can plug that in and
get an answer but now I want you to tell
me how many sig figs this has and to do
that you have to figure out how many sig
figs were actually in this number here
so you have to go back and look at the
problem and figure out the total number
of sig figs
see how easy that was to fix so it is -
because this had to and the
concentration was limiting here to two
significant figures so there were two
here which means there - after the
decimal point here and I have to say I
was looking at problem set seven and
some of those problems are just like if
you love significant figures they're a
joy because you got adding and
subtracting and then you had division
and then you have logs it is the triple
whammy of sigfig love all right so -
after the decimal point all right so we
have point one we have a pH that's
acidic that's good because at the
beginning all we have is a weak acid so
we have a pH of two point three eight so
that's point a so now let's look at this
region here in the buffering region and
again the buffering region is when you
have added volumes of your acid that are
greater than zero but less than the
volume needed to reach equilibrium and
so in this particular problem we're
going to calculate what happens when
five mils of our strong base are added
so this is basically point B here and
because it's a strong base it's going to
react with all of our the same number of
moles of our weak acid it's much
stronger than the conjugate base so it's
going to react pretty much completely
with this so we can write out that the
weak acid plus our base are going to be
converted over to the conjugate the
conjugate base of this weak acid so we
just we can just figure out the moles
and then subtract them to understand how
much is is left and how much is being
formed so first then we need to figure
out how many moles we had initially so
for our acid we had 25 mils of point one
zero molar so we have two point five
times ten to the minus three moles for
our hydroxide our strong base we've
added five mils and it was a point one
five molar solution so we have point
seven five times ten to the minus three
moles so now there's going to be this
reaction so we want to think
what happens after you have the reaction
of the strong base with the weak acid
and so just to emphasize this point say
we have eight moles of a of our acid
here and we added just one mole of our
strong base that will react pull off
deprotonate and form water and form the
conjugate base so net we had eight we
added one of the strong base so we have
seven left and we formed one of the
conjugate base and so I'm just showing
this here because so often on exams I
see people just plug the initial moles
into the later part and they forget that
there's a reaction happening and so I
was hoping if I would show this I'm
gonna get people used to being thinking
about okay I'm adding strong base what's
happening how much is being converted
and if you're not subtracting things
there's a problem with the way you're
doing the problem all right so here
these are less easy numbers to visualize
2.5 times 10 to the minus 3 moles how
much we had of our weak acid we have
added a strong base at 0.75 times 10 to
the minus 3 so we have 1.75 times 10 to
the minus 3 moles of our acid left so we
subtract the amount that's converted due
to the addition of the base and so why
don't you tell me how much then we're
going to have of our conjugate base
being formed
all right so I kind of tried to fool you
there but 74 70 percent of you we're not
having it okay so here it's going to be
equal to the number of moles of Oh H
that's added because that's how much is
going to be converted that's how much of
the conjugate acid is converted to the
conjugate base all right
now we have moles we need molarity if
we're going to use a KA to solve the
problem because the expression for
equilibrium constant has molarity not
moles so then in converting to molarity
the thing you have to remember is the
volume so we had 25 mils to start with
and now we've added five so we need to
make sure that we have the correct
number of liters in our expression so we
can calculate one point seven five cents
in to the minus three moles for a weak
acid volume concentration of weak acid
we have 0.75 times 10 to the minus 3 of
our conjugate base and then we have a
concentration there now there are two
ways to solve this problem and option
one uses ka it doesn't involve henderson
hasselbalch option two will involve
henderson hasselbalch and it's okay to
use this because this is a buffer
problem so option one now for
calculating point B so we can set up
this expression and always remember
you're talking about molarity here so
don't put in your moles in this
expression only put in molarity so
that's why the volume is really
important so we can put in our
concentration point zero five eight
three and it'll be minus X for
equilibrium plus X for our hydronium ion
concentration and also our concentration
of the conjugate base point zero two
five zero plus X so this is like a
buffer problem using option one and so
we can use ka plug in our values here we
have our conjugate base concentration at
equal
briam times our hydronium ion x over the
equilibrium molarity of our weak base we
can again assume X is small which drops
out the plus X and the minus X we solve
for X we get 4 point 1 3 times 10 to the
minus 4 we can check the assumption and
sure enough it's much smaller 1.7
percent point 7 percent of of these two
and you really only need to check one
the smaller one assumptions okay and we
can calculate then by putting in X which
is hydronium ion concentration into the
equation pH equals minus log of the
hydronium ion concentration equals the
pH three point three eight we can also
use henderson hasselbalch because it's a
buffer problem it's allowed you were
given a KA you can calculate PKA minus
the log of ka and put that number in put
in the concentrations that you
determined so you still need to subtract
the moles you can't skip that step but
you can skip the volume step because
when you use henderson hasselbalch the
volume would cancel out if you had moles
per volume moles per volume the volume
is the same so you can skip the
calculating molarity step here that
simplifies the problem and solve and you
should get the exact same number or
something was wrong both of these should
work equally well three point three
eight but you'll often be asked to check
the henderson hasselbalch assumption and
remember there was an assumption here
because we solve the henderson
hasselbalch from an equation that used
ka the equilibrium constant so really
this expression is at equilibrium but
we're plugging in values that are not at
equilibrium there the initial values
that we're putting into this equation so
we still need to check and we're using
the five percent rule so to check the
henderson hasselbalch then we have to
back calculate pH of three points
three eight equals a hydronium ion
concentration of 4.2 times ten to the
minus four and then you want to check
that that number is less than five
percent of the smaller number and we
checked that assumption when we looked
at auction a so it's still good for
option B and we can use the
henderson-hasselbalch now if it was
greater than five percent then you can
only use option one and you must use the
quadratic equation but this doesn't
happen very often because the buffer is
usually not a very good buffer if X is
not small a buffer is a good buffer when
you have a weak conjugate acid pair and
when you have weak conjugate acids and
bases then usually X is small it doesn't
ionize much in water so most of the time
these assumptions hold but if you're
asked to check an assumption that's what
you need to do all right so we have
point B two ways and we got the same
answer it's three point three eight and
that's point B and we're in the
buffering region there what about Point
C Point C is the half equivalence point
so let's think about what the pH would
be at the half equivalence point so with
the half equivalence point by definition
you've added half the number of moles
you need to reach the equivalence point
or half the volume of the strong base
that you need to reach the equivalence
point and at this point the number of
moles of your weak acid equal the number
of moles of your conjugate base so when
that is true and we look at the
henderson hasselbalch expression we see
that this term becomes one and so
therefore pH equals PKA so if you
weren't given the pKa and you were just
given the KA that's no problem because
you can calculate it minus log of ka and
so that's minus log of one point seven
seven times ten to the minus four for
this problem which gives us a pH about
three point seven five
so if you were just given the pka which
is for this 3.75 and it's really not
much more significant than that honestly
and they're actually not a lot of
significant figures when it comes to
measuring pH or pk's if on a test you
said the pKa of this is 3.75 what is the
pH at the half equivalence point you
could write down 3.75 and nothing else
you do not need to prove to me that that
that this expression here is true at the
half equivalence point it's just a way
to ask a question that tests your
knowledge of titrations so this is a
good problem that involves very little
work so you should be extremely excited
if I'm asking you about the pH at a half
equivalence point because that's gonna
be a real easy problem don't spend a lot
of time on it all right so we got Point
C 3.75 very close we're sort of in this
region where the pH is changing not that
much all right so that's the end of that
lecture but the beginning of the next
one starts where we left off as I said
acid-base titration problems take a long
time they're in two handouts and we're
just going to kind of continue now with
the next handout and point s the
equivalence point